In all cases, written answers (apart from code) should not be longer than about three paragraphs.  Graders may not read all of your
submission if it is longer than that.

Homework Reflection 5

1. Draw a diagram for the following negative feedback loop:

Sweating causes body temperature to decrease.  High body temperature causes sweating.

A negative feedback loop means that one thing increases another while the second thing decreases the first.

Remember that we are using directed acyclic graphs where two things cannot directly cause each other.

Negative Feedback Loop Diagram:

High Body Temperature → Sweating → Body Temperature (Decrease). 

This represents a DAG where high temperature causes sweating, and sweating causes a decrease in temperature, forming a negative feedback without direct cycles.

2. Describe an example of a positive feedback loop.  This means that one things increases another while the second things also increases the first.

Positive Feedback Loop Example: 

In childbirth, oxytocin increases uterine contractions, and uterine contractions increase oxytocin release, amplifying the process until delivery.

3. Draw a diagram for the following situation:

Lightning storms frighten away deer and bears, decreasing their population, and cause flowers to grow, increasing their population.
Bears eat deer, decreasing their population.
Deer eat flowers, decreasing their population.

Write a dataset that simulates this situation.  (Show the code.) Include noise / randomness in all cases.

Identify a backdoor path with one or more confounders for the relationship between deer and flowers.

Diagram: Lightning Storms → Deer (decrease), Lightning Storms → Bears (decrease), Lightning Storms → Flowers (increase); Bears → Deer (decrease); Deer → Flowers (decrease).

Simulation Dataset Code:

import numpy as np
import pandas as pd

num = 100
lightning = np.random.binomial(1, 0.5, num)  # Random lightning occurrence
bears = np.maximum(50 - 20 * lightning + np.random.normal(0, 5, num), 0)  # Bears decrease + noise
deer = np.maximum(100 - 10 * lightning - 0.5 * bears + np.random.normal(0, 10, num), 0)  # Deer decrease + noise
flowers = np.maximum(200 + 15 * lightning - 0.3 * deer + np.random.normal(0, 20, num), 0)  # Flowers increase/decrease + noise

df = pd.DataFrame({'lightning': lightning, 'bears': bears, 'deer': deer, 'flowers': flowers})
print(df.head())

Backdoor Path: 

Deer ← Lightning → Flowers (Lightning as confounder, distorting the deer-flowers causal relationship).

4. Draw a diagram for a situation of your own invention.  The diagram should include at least four nodes, one confounder, and one collider.  Be sure that it is acyclic (no loops).  Which node would say is most like a treatment (X)?  Which is most like an outcome (Y)?

Invented Situation Diagram: 

Smoking → Lung Cancer; Smoking → Yellow Teeth; Diet → Yellow Teeth (Yellow Teeth as collider); Diet → Obesity. 

Acyclic DAG with Diet as confounder (e.g., for Yellow Teeth-Obesity) and Yellow Teeth as collider. 

Treatment (X): Smoking (intervenable). Outcome (Y): Lung Cancer (key effect).


Homework Reflection 6

1. What is a potential problem with computing the Marginal Treatment Effect simply by comparing each untreated item to its counterfactual and taking the maximum difference?  (Hint: think of statistics here.  Consider that only the most extreme item ends up being used to estimate the MTE.  That's not necessarily a bad thing; the MTE is supposed to come from the untreated item that will produce the maximum effect.  But there is nevertheless a problem.)
Possible answer: We are likely to find the item with the most extreme difference, which may be high simply due to randomness.
(Please explain / justify this answer, or give a different one if you can think of one.)

2. Propose a solution that remedies this problem and write some code that implements your solution.  It's very important here that you clearly explain what your solution will do.
Possible answer: maybe we could take the 90th percentile of the treatment effect and use it as a proxy for the Marginal Treatment Effect.
(Either code this answer or choose a different one.)

Homework Reflection 7

1. Create a linear regression model involving a confounder that is left out of the model.  Show whether the true correlation between $$X$$ and $$Y$$ is overestimated, underestimated, or neither.  Explain in words why this is the case for the given coefficients you have chosen.

2. Perform a linear regression analysis in which one of the coefficients is zero, e.g.

W = [noise]
X = [noise]
Y = 2 * X + [noise]

And compute the p-value of a coefficient - in this case, the coefficient of W.  
(This is the likelihood that the estimated coefficient would be as high or low as it is, given that the actual coefficient is zero.)
If the p-value is less than 0.05, this ordinarily means that we judge the coefficient to be nonzero (incorrectly, in this case.)
Run the analysis 1000 times and report the best (smallest) p-value.  
If the p-value is less than 0.05, does this mean the coefficient actually is nonzero?  What is the problem with repeating the analysis?

Homework Reflection 8

Include the code you used to solve the two coding quiz problems and write about the obstacles / challenges / insights you encountered while solving them.
